Session tracking docs optimization (#1062)
rudderlabs/rudderstack-docs: docs/sources/event-streams/sdks/session-tracking/index.mdx

aliases: ["session tracking", "user session"]
---

A session is a group of user interactions with your website or mobile app within a given time frame. It is usually triggered when a user opens a mobile app or a website in their browser and ends after a particular period of inactivity.

<div class="infoBlock">
A single session can contain multiple page views or screen views, events, social interactions, and e-commerce transactions.
</div>

With the help of RudderStack's **session tracking** feature, you can gather the event tracking metrics and combine it with the session metadata to better understand the user's product journey and analyze their behavior. You can also use the resulting insights to identify problems and optimization opportunities in your product workflow.

> ## Session tracking in RudderStack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Session tracking by RudderStack SDK's
```

| <Link to="/sources/event-streams/sdks/rudderstack-android-sdk/">Android</Link> | <strong>v1.7.0</strong> |
| <Link to="/sources/event-streams/sdks/rudderstack-ios-sdk/">iOS</Link> | <strong>v1.7.0</strong> |

<div class="infoBlock">

> If the session tracking feature is enabled, you can expect the following properties in your event's <code class="inline-code">context</code> object:

Reviewer: > If the session tracking feature is enabled..

Gives a sense that the user needs to enable it but as I understand, it happens by default. May be we can tweak this sentence to clarify this

<ul>
<li><code class="inline-code">sessionId</code> (Number): The unique session ID.</li>
<li><code class="inline-code">sessionStart</code> (Boolean): Present in the first event, indicating the start of the session.</li>
</ul>
</div>

<div class="warningBlock">

> The session tracking feature overrides any <code class="inline-code">sessionId</code> set in the event's <code class="inline-code">context</code> object. Hence, it is strongly recommended to send any session-related information in the event's traits or properties.

Reviewer: bit confusing.. lets connect on chat/huddle as I want to understand this more

Author: Sure - earlier, users sent the session related data like session ID, etc. in the event's [`context`](https://www.rudderstack.com/docs/event-spec/standard-events/common-fields/#contextual-fields) object. Now, with our SDKs automatically setting the `sessionId` and `sessionStart` params in the `context` object (as mentioned above), any session-related info manually supplied by the user will be overridden. Hence the warning to set any other session-related information in the event's `traits` object or properties.

> It is strongly recommended to send any other session-related information in the event's traits or properties as RudderStack's automatic session tracking overrides any <code class="inline-code">sessionId</code> set in the event's <code class="inline-code">context</code> object.

Author: ```suggestion
It is strongly recommended to send any other session-related information in the event's traits or properties as RudderStack's <Link to="#automatic-session-tracking">automatic session tracking</Link> overrides any <code class="inline-code">sessionId</code> set in the event's <code class="inline-code">context</code> object.
```

> It is strongly recommended to send any other session-related information in the event's traits or properties. When session tracking is enabled, RudderStack overrides any <code class="inline-code">sessionId</code> set in the event's <code class="inline-code">context</code> object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is strongly recommended to send any other session-related information in the event's traits or properties as RudderStack's automatic session tracking overrides any <code class="inline-code">sessionId</code> set in the event's <code class="inline-code">context</code> object.
```

For more information on how RudderStack calculates <code class="inline-code">sessionId</code>, refer to the <Link to="/sources/event-streams/sdks/session-tracking/faq/#how-does-rudderstack-determine-the-sessionid">FAQ</Link> guide. 
</div>

3. The SDK records the user events and the session is active until the `timeout` (default **30 minutes** of inactivity) period has elapsed since the last received event. If yes, it starts a new session with a new `sessionId`.

> 4. Otherwise, the SDK updates the session expiration time by adding the last event's <Link to="/event-spec/standard-events/common-fields/#clock-skew-considerations">`timestamp`</Link> to the `timeout` period (default **30 minutes**).

Reviewer 2: This is not correct for Mobile SDKs. The previous one is the correct one.

Author: @pallabmaiti This section is specific to only JS SDK. We have a separate flow explained for Mobile SDKs in the following section.
